---
title: "Modern DateTimes on Android"
description: "REPLACE ME"
date: 2019-04-07
slug: time
---

Java 8 gave us a great gift — `java.time` package, known as
[JSR 310](https://jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=310) and
[ThreeTen](https://www.threeten.org/).
The story behind `java.time` is unique. It was introduced as
[JEP 150](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/150) by an independent developer —
Stephen Colebourne, i. e. [`@jodastephen`](https://github.com/jodastephen).
Yep, the same person who designed and developed
[Joda-Time](https://github.com/JodaOrg/joda-time).
It was endorsed by Brian Goetz, the
[Java Concurrency in Practice](http://jcip.net/) author.
The result was a great API — explicit and direct,
based on years of Joda-Time experience.


> The existing Java date and time classes are poor, mutable,
> and have unpredictable performance. There has been a long-standing desire
> for a better date and time API based on the Joda-Time project.
> The new API will have a more intuitive design allowing code
> to better express its intent. The classes will also be immutable
> which aligns with the multi-core direction of the industry.
>
> — [_JEP 150: Motivation_](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/150)

There is [a further motivation](https://www.joda.org/joda-time/) behind replacing
`java.util.Date` and `java.util.Calendar` with Joda-Time. The same reasoning applies
to ThreeTen. [This was discussed before](https://stackoverflow.com/a/1969651/3359826)
millions of times. The message is stable — the replacement was needed.
The good news — we got it. The bad news — we have...

# Android

Java 8 was released in 2014, now is 2019 and we still cannot use it on Android
without asteriscs. Java APIs have a rough adoption rate on Android —
it is the underlying reason for Kotlin popularity.

## `minSdkVersion <= 25`

Use [ThreeTenBP](https://github.com/ThreeTen/threetenbp) (ThreeTen backport) and
[ThreeTenABP](https://github.com/JakeWharton/ThreeTenABP/) (ThreeTen Android backport).

The Android one is not actually a full-blown ThreeTen implementation,
it is basically a special `ZoneRulesInitializer` which fetches time zone data
not from Java resources but from Android assets since it is more efficient.

Recommended dependencies:

* Application:
    * `com.jakewharton.threetenabp:threetenabp:{abp_version}` —
      efficient time zone initializer.
    * `org.threeten:threetenbp:{bp_version}:no-tzdb` —
      actual ThreeTenBP, but [without default time zones data](https://github.com/ThreeTen/threetenbp/blob/31b133c35cbc45b767e0c9392818438f20b80059/pom.xml#L218-L237).
      ThreeTenABP provides the same transitive dependency under the hood
      but it is important to have the same ThreeTenBP for...
* Unit tests:
    * `org.threeten:threetenbp:{bp_version}` — usual ThreeTenBP.
      Unit tests are being run on JVM so there is no need for an Android-specific
      time zones initializer.

### Joda-Time?

Abandon Joda-Time! Don’t be hisitant to migrate from it to ThreeTenBP ASAP.

* ThreeTen is the next evolutionary step, created by the same developer.
* Since ThreeTenBP is a ThreeTen backport, migrating to `java.time` will be
  bulk a package replacement from `org.threeten.bp` with `java.time` and
  removing unused dependencies. Joda-Time will require more work, depending
  on the actual usage. The migration itself is a fact — `java.time` is already
  available on Android and it is a matter of time before we can use it everywhere.
* JVM ecosystem already moved on to `java.time`. It is better to use same APIs
  as the rest of developers to speak the same language.
* ThreeTen is better for APK size than Joda-Time.
    * Joda-Time without time zones + Joda-Time Android is `735 KiB`.
    * ThreeTenBP without time zones + ThreeTenABP is `485 KiB`.

## `minSdkVersion >= 26`

Damn, it feels good, right? Use `java.time`, forget about Joda-Time and ThreeTenBP.

The downside of using `java.time` is time zone updates.
Since standalone distributions (such as Joda-Time and ThreeTenBP) carry their
own time zone databases it is possible to update them separately.
Unfortunately on Android [system time zone updates depend on OEM](https://source.android.com/devices/tech/config/timezone-rules).
It is an open question who actually does this in practice.

> :book: Android [uses ICU](https://android.googlesource.com/platform/libcore/+/master/ojluni/src/main/java/java/time/zone/IcuZoneRulesProvider.java)
> to provide time zone data.

# Usage

## Access

Since ThreeTenBP without time zone data will not initialize time zones by itself,
we’ll need to make it ourselves. Even worse — executing time zone-related
operations will lead to runtime exceptions. It is a good idea to have
a time abstraction in place which will be an entry point for time-related data.
It is a good practice to have it for testing purposes anyway.

> :book: `Duration` is safe to use everywhere since it is basically
> [a pair of seconds and nanoseconds](https://github.com/ThreeTen/threetenbp/blob/31b133c35cbc45b767e0c9392818438f20b80059/src/main/java/org/threeten/bp/Duration.java#L486-L490)
> with syntax sugar on top.

```kotlin
interface Time {

    fun now(): ZonedDateTime

    class Impl(private val context: AndroidContext) : Time {

        private val initialized = AtomicBoolean()

        override fun now(): ZonedDateTime {
            if (initialized.get() == false) {
                AndroidThreeTen.init(context)
                initialized.set(true)
            }

            return ZonedDateTime.now()
        }
    }
}
```

It is not the best implementation, especially thread-safe one, but it delivers the idea.

Don’t forget that even if ThreeTenABP features efficient time zone data initializer
it still takes more than 100 milliseconds to do so. To avoid blocking
the main thread use background threads on the application startup.

```kotlin
class Application : android.app.Application {

    override fun onCreate() {
        super.onCreate()

        // Provide time variable via IoC container of choise.

        Schedulers.io().scheduleDirect { time.now() }
    }
}
```

## Constants

There is a common struggle in the industry with naming variables.

```kotlin
companion object {
    private const val DELAY = 10
}
```

What does it even mean? Are we talking about seconds or hours? We can make it a bit better.

```kotlin
companion object {
    private const val DELAY_SECONDS = 10
}
```

It does not save us though. Since naming is a semantic rule,
it depends on human nature and behavior. Fortunately enough we have `TimeUnit`.

```kotlin
companion object {
    private val DELAY = 10 to TimeUnit.SECONDS
}
```

It partially resolves the issue but makes usage cumbersome.

```kotlin
val millis = DELAY.second.toMillis(DELAY.first)
```

This is where `Duration` comes in.

```kotlin
companion object {
    private val DELAY = Duration.ofSeconds(10)
}
```
```kotlin
val millis = DELAY.toMillis()
```

Being honest — it is not a silver bullet but it reduces the confusion significantly.

# Time Out

Think about what to do with time before you run out of... time.

---

The title is a reference to the [Charlie Chaplin movie](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modern_Times_(film)).
